Climate Change - Complete Overview

What is Climate Change:
Climate change refers to long term shifts in global temperatures and weather patterns. Since the 1800s human activities have been the main driver of climate change. Burning fossil fuels like coal oil and gas releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. These gases trap heat from the sun and warm the planet.

Greenhouse Gases:
Carbon dioxide is the most important greenhouse gas released by burning fossil fuels. Methane is released by livestock farming and landfills and is 80 times more powerful than CO2. Nitrous oxide comes from agricultural fertilizers. Water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas but is not directly caused by humans.

Effects of Climate Change:
Global temperatures have risen by 1.1 degrees Celsius since pre industrial times. Sea levels are rising due to melting ice sheets and glaciers. Extreme weather events like hurricanes floods and droughts are becoming more frequent. Coral reefs are dying due to ocean warming and acidification. Many species of animals and plants are going extinct faster than ever before.

Melting Ice and Rising Seas:
The Arctic is warming four times faster than the rest of the planet. Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are losing billions of tons of ice every year. Sea levels have risen by 20 centimeters in the last century. Low lying countries like Bangladesh and islands like Maldives face being underwater by 2100.

Climate Agreements:
The Paris Agreement was signed in 2015 by 196 countries. Countries agreed to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre industrial levels. The Glasgow Climate Pact in 2021 called for phasing down coal use. However many countries are not meeting their climate commitments.

Solutions to Climate Change:
Renewable energy like solar and wind power can replace fossil fuels. Electric vehicles reduce emissions from transportation. Energy efficient buildings reduce heating and cooling emissions. Reforestation plants trees that absorb carbon dioxide. Carbon capture technology removes CO2 directly from the air.

Pakistan and Climate Change:
Pakistan is one of the most climate vulnerable countries in the world. The 2022 floods in Pakistan affected 33 million people and caused 30 billion dollars in damage. Pakistan's glaciers in the Himalayas are melting rapidly. Pakistan contributes less than 1 percent of global emissions but suffers greatly from climate impacts.